Introduction Neurological disorders, including Parkinson’s disease (PD), epilepsy, dementia, and stroke, account for 6.3% of global disability-adjusted life years [1]. PD or related conditions, per UK Brain Bank Criteria, include motor symptoms such as bradykinesia, tremor, cogwheel rigidity, and postural instability and nonmotor symptoms including cognitive dysfunction, anosmia, and gastrointestinal abnormalities [2, 3]. PD is the second most common neurodegenerative disorder worldwide, affecting the elderly population with a significant impact on the quality of life. Parkinsonism is an umbrella term which includes symptoms identified in PD and atypical parkinsonism. Early recognition of parkinsonism prompts medical evaluation, diagnostics, and medical treatment, which can significantly delay worsening of both motor and nonmotor symptoms, improve quality of life, and preserve the ability to work. It has been estimated that 10 million people worldwide have PD, with 1% of those above 60 years old [4]. The rapid growth of the PD prevalence worldwide is of particular concern in the context of an aging global population [5]. However, there is a lack of knowledge regarding parkinsonism in the community, and elderly individuals often do not present to a neurologist due to lack of awareness. This may differ by geography and culture, as some cultures may be more likely to attribute parkinsonian symptoms to “normal aging.” In India, due to the aging population, the burden of noncommunicable diseases is rising [6]. To date, there have been few studies of PD/parkinsonism in the Indian population [7–15], and most studies suggest the overall prevalence of the disease in India is markedly less than that in European populations [16]. However, one of the studies showed a higher prevalence of parkinsonism in Bangalore and Southern India [13], which was noteworthy in revealing a profound lack of awareness and recognition of parkinsonism especially in rural communities. Over the last 20 years, there has been no study on the prevalence of parkinsonism in western India. To better guide policies and distribution of healthcare resources regarding evaluation and treatment of parkinsonism, further evaluation of the variability of prevalence across different regions in India is required. Here, we report the prevalence of PD in the rural population of Gujarat, a state in the western region of India, using a door-to-door survey method with a screening questionnaire combined with audiovisual recordings as well as detailed evaluation by a neurologist. Furthermore, we also analyze exploratory data on specific types of PD and environmental exposures in this rural population. Materials and Methods This was a cross-sectional descriptive study conducted in the villages of Anand, a district of Gujarat, in the western region of India, between September 15, 2019, and February 28, 2020. Our investigation was approved by the Government of India’s Health Minister’s Screening Committee (HMSC) through the submission proposal 2019–7627/F1 to the Indian Council for Medical Research (ICMR). Ethical approvals were also obtained from the Human Research Ethics Committee at Charutar Arogya Mandal (CAM)-Shree Krishna Hospital and Pramukhswami Medical College and the Institutional Review Board at the University of Massachusetts Medical School (UMMS, H00013953). Participants and Study Design A noncommunicable disease prevention and care program named SPARSH (Shree Krishna Hospital Program for Advancement of Rural and Social Health) is being implemented in 150 villages of this region by Shree Krishna Hospital (SKH), a medical teaching hospital managed by CAM. As a part of this program, village health workers were identified from each village and trained to provide various services in their village such as screening, monitoring, follow-up of diseases, medicine delivery, and lifestyle education for noncommunicable diseases. Ten villages with a total population of 25,858 were selected for this study by the SPARSH team. All adults above 18 years of age who were able to give informed consent except pregnant women were included. A 2-step door-to-door survey of all residents of 10 villages was conducted through trained social workers with support of the village health workers. A previously published prescreening questionnaire [17] (Table  1) was administered by the trained social workers to all residents. Those who answered yes to at least one of the questions were marked as a positive screen and subsequently included for the full screening process including a more detailed questionnaire. All the social workers were trained to administer and video record the examination using a checklist based on the modified version of part III (motor) of the Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) examination [18]. A speech sample was recorded for the patients who were screened positive after consent. Tone examination and pull test were not included in the videography as tone assessment is impossible on video and pull test carried a risk of fall and injury to the participants. Video recordings were validated for uniformity in a baseline pilot study in 20 inpatients and outpatients with and without parkinsonism after consent. The recorded video samples of individuals who screened positive were reviewed by a neurologist, (S.D.) at SKH. The individuals who were screened positive based on the screening questionnaire and videography were then called for detailed clinical evaluation at SKH on a specific designated day for each village by arranging free transportation. The consultation and investigation fees were waived. Further diagnostic tests were also performed including blood work (serum sodium, creatinine, thyroid-stimulating hormone, liver function test, and complete blood count) and noncontrast CT head scan/MRI brain when required. After correlating clinical evaluation and laboratory findings, the final diagnosis was made. Mini-International Neuropsychiatric Interview (MINI) screen [19] and a local culturally acceptable modified version of the Non-Motor Symptoms (NMS) scale [20] were used to assess mental health and nonmotor symptoms of participants who were diagnosed with PD. Appropriate medications were prescribed, and a monthly home follow-up was conducted over 3 months. During these visits, a questionnaire was administered to check improvement status or any side effects of medications. The motor examination and a speech sample were video recorded during the monthly home follow-up and reviewed by the neurologist who assessed the patient’s condition and advised medication changes if indicated. Statistics SAS software was used to calculate the screening yield. For primary outcomes, the prevalence of PD was calculated across the study population. Age-stratified prevalence of PD was also calculated. Multivariate regression models were used to ascertain the relationship between different types of parkinsonism and demographic/exposure variables. Results Demographics Of the total population of 25,858 villagers, a total of 18,896 people from 5,590 households were assessed in the study (Table 2). The population comprised 51.5% males and 48.5% females. The median (IQR) age of the participants was 38 (26, 51) years. Nearly one-third (28.7%) of the working population were daily wage workers doing nonagricultural labor. Most of them used well water at some point in their lives, although municipal water supply was the main source in the community during this study. The majority of the population was aged between 18 and 30 years, and the literacy rate was 86.1%. PD Prevalence and Characteristics Based on the prescreening questionnaire, 54 participants screened positive for parkinsonism (Table 3). In the prescreening questionnaire, most positively screened for “Do your hands, legs, or head shake?” (92.6%) followed by “If yes, does it occur when your arms are resting on your lap?” (83.3%). A fewer number answered positively for “Do you think your speech has become softer/slower in the recent past?” (25.9%) and “Do you find difficulty turning in bed?” (18.5%). Among 54 positively screened participants, 49 underwent further clinical evaluation, and 8 of them were confirmed with a diagnosis of PD. Among the 49 positively screened participants, 28 (57.1%) were diagnosed with essential or dystonic tremors and 13 (26.5%) had “other neurological conditions” mimicking symptoms of PD. These included vascular parkinsonism, progressive supranuclear palsy, multiple system atrophy, spinocerebellar ataxia, and drug/toxin-induced parkinsonism. Eight patients were diagnosed with PD. Of these 8, 7 were in the age group of 60–90 years, and the majority were male (75.0%) (Table 4). The crude prevalence of PD was recorded to be 42.3 per 100,000, and the age-specific prevalence in the age group of the 60s and above was 308.9 per 100,000. Their mean duration of illness was 39.3 ± 27.3 months. The mean modified motor UPDRS score of the patients was 26.7 ± 10.6, and the mean Hoehn-Yahr stage was 2.1 ± 0.8. On MINI screen, “major depressive disorders” (25.0%), “social anxiety disorder” (37.5%), and “generalized anxiety disorder” (37.5%) were the most commonly reported symptoms. Among the nonmotor symptoms, >50.0% of patients had hyposmia, constipation, cognitive symptoms, loss of interest, difficulty in focusing, anxiety, pain, lightheadedness/dizziness with the positional change, insomnia, restless legs, and frequent urination at night. Environmental Factors and PD Though the main aim of this study was to ascertain prevalence of PD, the effect of certain exposures and their association with PD were also studied. The distribution of various exposures in positively screened participants is included in Table 5. Univariate analysis was used to study individual associations. Variables like physical activity, exposure to agricultural chemicals, sex, substance use, drinking well water, etc., were not found to be statistically significant. Subsequently, on multiple logistic regression, none of these variables showed statistical significance of association with PD. Discussion In India, the burden of noncommunicable diseases such as PD is rising. This study aimed to identify the prevalence of PD in rural western Gujarat and evaluate wheer environmental factors may play a role. The overall crude prevalence of PD in the rural area of Anand, a district of Gujarat, in India was 42.3 per 100,000. Few prior studies done in different parts of India showed crude prevalence of PD/parkinsonism ranging from 14 to 328.3 per 100,000 [7–12, 14], and our results are consistent with this range of prevalence (Table 6). The incidence of parkinsonism increases with aging [21], and the duration of the disease is relatively long since it is one of the chronic and slowly progressing neurodegenerative diseases. In this study, the prevalence of PD over the age of 60 was 308.9 per 100,000 which clearly shows the trend of increasing prevalence of PD with age. Also, sex-specific prevalence rates in most studies were reported to be higher in men than in women [22–24], and a similar result was observed in this study. Nonmotor symptoms of parkinsonism including psychiatric symptoms are significant and often disabling. The previous community-based studies in India had not assessed nonmotor symptoms. Our study included an assessment of nonmotor symptoms including detailed assessment of comorbid psychiatric disorders. More than half of patients with PD identified in our study had multiple associated nonmotor symptoms and nearly onethird had comorbid anxiety or depression. Patients were often embarrassed by their PD symptoms, leading to anxiety. In particular, tremor, slowness, and postural change were major distressing symptoms. Despite chronically suffering from motor and nonmotor symptoms of PD, patients did not seek intervention by a neurologist due to limited community awareness of PD and its possible treatment options. Increased awareness of not only motor symptoms but also nonmotor and psychiatric symptoms may help in earlier diagnosis and treatment of PD, which can also improve patients’ quality of life. Environmental factors as well as genetic factors are important in the pathogenesis of PD [25]. Previous studies have reported that consumption of well water and exposure to pesticides or other toxins are associated with increased risk of PD [26]. Smoking cigarettes and drinking coffee were reported as protective factors which can decrease risk of the disease [27–29]. We included these variables in the study; however, we did not see any statistical significance in patients with PD in our study as the sample size of diagnosed patients with PD was a limiting factor. Our study used a 3-step approach in evaluating for parkinsonism including a screening questionnaire, video recording, and clinical examination by a neurologist and laboratory evaluation and brain imaging. Validated videographic motor examination followed by clinical evaluations conducted by a neurologist allowed for clinical expertise in evaluating patient assessments. Through this multistep approach, we identified patients with PD as well as other neurological conditions that may resemble PD including essential or dystonic tremor, progressive supranuclear palsy, multiple system atrophy, spinocerebellar ataxia, vascular parkinsonism, or drug/toxin-induced parkinsonism. Detailed clinical evaluation, hematologic and radiological evaluation, and follow-up allowed for a detailed investigation into the etiology of parkinsonism including secondary and atypical parkinsonism, which were excluded to get correct diagnosis and prevalence of PD. Epidemiological studies that rely solely on screening questionnaires without clinical evaluation may misdiagnose symptoms such as tremor or slowness which can be seen in essential tremor, other tremor syndromes, and secondary and atypical parkinsonism. During our study, all patients received free consultation, treatment, and transportation to clinical evaluations, as well as 3 months of home medications. Thorough evaluation and free treatment of not only motor but also nonmotor symptoms were provided. However, there were few limitations in this study including limited follow-up for a period of 3 months, missing patients who did not come for clinical evaluation, and clinical evaluation by only one neurologist. It is uncertain whether they will be able to continue long-term follow-up and be able to afford treatment in the long term. The overall prevalence of PD/parkinsonism in India is known to be low [5]. However, studies are limited, and there are individuals who have not been diagnosed with the disease due to a lack of awareness especially in rural communities. In our study, 7 out of 8 patients were newly diagnosed with PD, and their mean duration of illness was 39.3 ± 27.3 months; without this community-based screening study, they likely would have continued suffering with their symptoms without knowing their diagnosis or treatment options. This raises a concern for undetected cases of PD in similar rural regions throughout India and draws attention to the need for advocacy campaigns and further research to improve knowledge and awareness about PD in the rural community. Conducting a similar multistep screening study as was performed in this study across different regions in India will help generate comparable prevalence data across the country. A similar approach can also be adopted in primary healthcare programs to improve early detection and appropriate management using clearly defined protocols. Ultimately, this can significantly delay worsening of symptoms and improve quality of life. 
Conclusion This study showed the current epidemiological data of PD from Gujarat, in western India, using a multistep approach. Further studies using a similar method across different regions in India will be needed for better understanding of PD prevalence in the Indian population.
