1. Introduction Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a debilitating disease that mainly affects individuals over the age of 65. It is the second most common neurodegenerative disorder affecting 1–2 persons per 1000 of population [1]. PD is characterised with motor dysfunctions such as rigidity, resting tremor, bradykinesia and posture instability. Dopamine (DA) depletion in the basal ganglia is primarily responsible for characteristic motor dysfunctions observed in PD [2]. Current pharmacological intervention for PD includes levodopa (L-Dopa), the precursor of DA that restores DA levels in brain of PD patients. Selective monoamine oxidase B (MAO-B) inhibitors are also used as adjuvants along with L-Dopa in the treatment of PD [3]. Monoamine oxidase (MAO) is a flavin adenine dinucleotide containing enzyme that is located in the outer mitochondrial membrane. MAO catalyzes oxidative deamination of monoamines that includes neurotransmitters such as DA, epinephrine and nor-epinephrine. MAO exists in two isoforms; MAO-A and MAO-B. These isoforms have 73% sequence similarity but differ in substrate and inhibitor specificity [4]. The typical physiological substrate for MAO-A is serotonin and for MAO-B is DA. Selective MAO-A inhibitors are useful in the treatment of depression, while MAO-B inhibitors are effective in treatment of PD and Alzheimer’s disease [5]. The selective and reversible MAO inhibitors (MAOIs) are at the cornerstone of drug discovery against neurodegenerative and neuropsychiatric disorders [6]. The pharmacological MAO inhibitors are effective but have various side effects primarily, a hypertensive crisis known as “cheese effect” that results from ingestion of tyramine-rich foods [7]. Although, rasagiline treatment is not associated with cheese effect but it is contraindicated in PD patients with hepatic dysfunctions, and cannot be co-administered with opioids and anti-depressants [8]. Therefore, based on the pharmacological importance of MAO-B inhibitors in PD, discovery of novel and plant based molecules may have immense therapeutic potential because of lesser side effects. 3-Hydroxytyrosol (HXT) or 3,4-dihydroxyphenylethanol is a natural polyphenol present in extra virgin olive oil (EVOO) and olive leaf extract (OLE) [9]. It is a key component of Mediterranean diet and possesses strong antioxidant activity [10]. In addition to antioxidant activity, HXT possesses other cytoprotective properties that include restoration of mitochondrial functions, endoplasmic reticulum stress and anti-inflammatory action [11]. Various studies have assessed cardioprotective [12], anti-cancer [13], anti-obesity [14] and anti-diabetic effects [15] of HXT. Emerging evidence indicates neuroprotective effects of HXT in neurodegenerative conditions. Recent studies have suggested that HXT mitigates Alzheimer’s disease and PD by preventing amyloid [16] and synuclein [17] aggregation. HXT has also been shown to stimulate neurogenesis in dentate gyrus by enhancing stem and progenitor cell proliferation and neuron survival in aged mice [18]. It has been shown that treatment of early stage PD patients with HXT-containing polyphenol formulation reduces the dose of anti-PD drugs [19]. Furthermore, HXT has been shown to protect PC-12 cells from α-synuclein toxicity and prevent fibril formation [20]. Rosa et al. [21] have recently shown HXT to prevent synuclein aggregation and mitigate behavioural deficits in PD model of C. elegans. HXT has also been reported to protect differentiated PC-12 dopamine(DA)rgic cells from damage caused by H2O2 induced oxidative stress [22]. In addition, HXT has been reported to mitigate production of potentially harmful DA oxidation products following MAO inhibition [23]. Studies suggest beneficial effects of HXT are exerted by its antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties along with its ability to prevent synuclein aggregation [24]. The catechol group in HXT has been suggested to be responsible for its antioxidant and neuroprotective effects [25]. The presence of catechol ring also suggests that HXT may inhibit MAO-B activity, which may contribute to its beneficial effect in PD. However, the anti-parkinsonian effect of HXT focusing on MAO-B inhibition has not been fully investigated. A recent study by Perez-Barron et al. [26] showed inhibition of MAO activity by HXT and prevention of neurotoxicity induced by MPP+. In present study we have investigated potential of HXT to inhibit MAO-B activity using computational, biochemical and pharmacological approaches. Moreover, molecular dynamics simulation was also performed in order to evaluate the stability of enzyme-ligand complex. Furthermore, neuroprotective and anti-parkinsonian properties of HXT were also evaluated in MPTP-induced mice model of PD in terms of its ability to restore dopamine levels, MAO-B activity and behavioural deficits. The findings from the study convincingly reveal beneficial role of HXT as an anti-parkinsonian molecule and suggest MAO-B as one of the potential targets in ameliorative action of HXT. 2. Materials and methods 2.1. Chemicals and reagents All the chemicals used in the study were of analytical grade and purchased from Sigma Chemical Co. (St. Louis, MO, USA), Merck (Mumbai, India), and Sisco Research Laboratories Pvt. Ltd. (Mumbai, India). Hydroyxtyrosol and MPTP (1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine) were purchased from Tokyo Chemical Industry (TCI) Co., Ltd. (Tokyo, Japan). 2.2. In-silico studies 2.2.1. Preparation of protein The three dimensional (3D) structure of human MAO-A (hMAO-A) co-crystallised with harmine (PDB id: 2Z5X; Resolution: 2.2 Å) [27] and hMAO-B co-crystallised with zonisamide (PDB id: 3PO7; Resolution: 1.8 Å) [28] were retrieved from Research Collaborator for Structural Bioinformatics (RCSB) protein data bank. The protein structures were prepared using protein preparation wizard of the Schrodinger ¨ suite in a manner reported earlier [29]. Briefly, the chains A was kept, bond orders were assigned, missing hydrogens were added and water of crystallisation was removed. The protonation state and tautomer assignment were also carried out and the resulting structures were then submitted to a restrained molecular mechanics refinement using OPLS (optimised potentials for liquid simulations) 2005 force field in Impref module. The minimisation was terminated until the heavy atom root mean square deviation converged to 0.3 Å. The docking grid box was generated using centroid of co-crystallised ligands that were present in 2Z5X and 3PO7, respectively, with a maximum size of 20 Å for further use in docking studies. 2.2.2. Ligand preparation Brofaromine and rasagiline were selected as known potent selective inhibitors of MAO-A and MAO-B, respectively. The 3-D structure of DA (CID-681), HXT (CID-82755), rasagiline (CID-3052776) and brofaromine (CID-44571) were downloaded from NCBI Pubchem in SDF format and were prepared using LigPrep [30] module of the Schrodinger ¨ software (Cambridge, MA, USA) in a similar manner as reported earlier [31]. All the structures were ionised at pH 7.0 ± 2.0, and tautomers were generated followed by energy minimisation by Impref module using OPLS_2005 force field method. The prepared ligands were then used for docking studies. 2.2.3. ADME screening ADME (Absorption, Distribution, Metabolism and Excretion) screening for HXT was done according to the method described by Lipinski [32]. ADME screening detects drug likeliness of compounds. According to Lipinski’s rule of five, compound molecular weights (MW), calculated logarithm of the partition coefficient between n-octanol and water (CLogP), molar refractivity, number of hydrogen bond acceptors (HBA) and number of hydrogen bond donors (HBD) were used to assess the “drug-likeness” [33]. Blood brain barrier (BBB) permeability prediction of HXT was done by using AlzPlatform database as described by Liu et al. [34]. The compounds having positive values readily cross BBB, while compounds with negative values are poorly distributed in the brain [35]. 2.2.4. Molecular docking In-silico molecular docking analysis for selected ligands against MAO-A and MAO-B were performed to estimate protein-ligand affinities using extra-precision (XP) docking method available in Glide module of Schrodinger suite [36]. The molecular docking simulations output file, containing all the information in the form of Glide score was analysed using Glide XP visualizer, which enables visualisation of ligand–receptor interactions in an interactive manner. The best docking poses were then subjected to binding free-energy calculations using Prime MM-GBSA module of Schrodinger ¨ software in a manner described earlier by Yadav et al. [29]. 2.2.5. Molecular dynamics simulation In order to better understand the protein-ligand interactions in a simulated physiological system, molecular dynamics (MD) simulation analysis was performed using Desmond molecular dynamics program [37] as described earlier by Uniyal et al. [31]. Briefly, the protein-ligand complex was placed in an orthorhombic box with dimensions 10 × 10 × 10 Å and was explicitly solvated using TIP3P (three-site transferrable intermolecular potential) water model. OPLS3e was used as a force field for the system. The system was then neutralised with the addition of Na+ and Cl− ions at a final concentration of 0.15 M. Before the final run, the system was subjected to several steps of energy minimisation and pre-equilibration using the standard equilibration protocol implemented in Desmond. The equilibration began with a Brownian Dynamics NVT (Normal volume and temperature) simulation for 100 ps at 10 K temperature, with small timesteps and restraints on solute heavy atoms followed by NVT simulation for 12 ps at 10 K temperature with small timesteps and restraints on solute heavy atoms. Then a 12 ps NPT (Normal Pressure and Temperature) simulation at 10 K temperature with restraints on solute heavy atoms and a 12 ps NPT simulation with restraints on solute heavy atoms, and finally a 24 ps NPT simulation without any restraints. After all these equilibration steps, final MD simulation was performed for 50 ns using NPT ensemble at 300 K and 1.013 bar with the default setting of relaxation before simulation [37]. Temperature and pressure were maintained by the Nose–Hoover Chain thermostat and Martyna–Tobias–Klein barostat, respectively [38] The RESPA integrator was used with a time step of 2 fs during the simulation with a smooth particle mesh Ewald (PME) method for the calculation of long-range electrostatic interaction. The energy and coordinates were saved in the trajectory at every 10 ps. The final simulation trajectory was analysed and reported. 2.3. In vitro studies 2.3.1. Preparation of samples Blood samples were collected from the healthy volunteers in age group of 25–35 years in accordance with the ethical guidelines of the institutional ethical committee. The blood samples (5 ml) were collected in ethylene diamine tetra-acetic acid (EDTA) tubes for assessing the platelet MAO-B activity. The samples were then centrifuged at 100 g for 10 min to obtain platelet-rich plasma (PRP). PRP was stored immediately at − 80 ◦C until further analysis. On the day of the analysis, PRP was thawed and the platelets were isolated by centrifugation at 500 g for 10 min, resuspended in 5 mM Na+/K+ phosphate buffer pH 7.4. Following centrifugation, the pellet was resuspended in 5 mM Na+/K+ phosphate buffer supplemented with 5% (w/v) bovine serum albumin, 10 mM dithiothreitol and 2.5 mM EDTA, homogenised for 20 s, and further diluted with assay buffer for MAO-B activity [39]. 2.3.2. Platelet MAO-B activity Platelet MAO-B activity was assayed by fluorometric kynuramine deamination assay. The inhibitory effect of HXT (0.1–200 µM) and rasagiline (1–10 nM) were assessed on platelet MAO-B activity. The reaction mixture containing 0.5 M K2HPO4, 10 μM kynuramine (Substrate) was pre-incubated at 37 ◦C for 10 min. After incubation, the reaction was initiated with the addition of sample (enzyme) and the reaction mixture was incubated for 30 min at 37 ◦C. The reaction was stopped by adding 2 ml of 1 N NaOH. The contents were then centrifuged and the fluorescence of 4-hydroxyquinoline, which is an oxidation product of kynuramine, was measured at excitation of 318 nm and emission at 380 nm using spectrofluorometer (Shimadzu, Japan). 4- Hydroxyquinoline was quantified from the standard curve (1–4.5 nM) and the rate of 4-hydroxyquinoline formation was fitted to the one site competition model of Prism 5 software (GraphPad-Version 5.01). The IC50 values were estimated from the sigmoidal plot. 2.4. In-vivo studies 2.4.1. Animals and treatment schedule C57BL/6 mice (male, eight weeks old, weighing 23–28 g) were procured from the Central Animal House of the Panjab University, Chandigarh. The animals were acclimatised to the local vivarium prior to the study and were fed with standard pellet diet (Ashirwad Industries, Kharar, Punjab, India). The procedures followed for the study were approved by the Institutional Animal Ethics Committee (PU/IAEC/S/ 15/107) and were in accordance with the guidelines of Committee for the Purpose of Control and Supervision of Experiments on Animals (CPCSEA). MPTP was administered to mice as four intraperitoneal (i.p.) injections (20 mg MPTP/kg body weight) in saline at 2 h intervals in a single day [40]. Animals were randomly distributed into the following groups. The treatment paradigm followed is shown in Fig. 1. The total dose of MPTP per animal was 80 mg/kg. HXT treated mice received HXT at a dose of 50 mg/kg body weight by oral gavage 7 days prior to acute MPTP administration in pre-HXT group and 7 days after the last MPTP injection in post-HXT group. The dose of HXT used in the study is the most effective dose reported [41] and was evaluated in our laboratory. At the end of the study, animals were sacrificed by cervical dislocation under light anaesthesia (sodium phenobarbital, i.p., 50 mg/kg body weight). The striatal regions were dissected and stored immediately at − 80 ◦C for further analysis. 2.4.2. Monoamine oxidase-B activity Mitochondrial fractions for MAO-B assay were prepared from the striatum as described by Puka-Sundvall et al. [42]. Briefly, 10% (w/v) homogenate was prepared in ice-cold buffer A [10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), 0.44 M sucrose, 10 mM EDTA and 0.1% (w/v) bovine serum albumin] using Potter-Elvehjam-type glass homogeniser and the homogenate was centrifuged at 2100 g for 15 min at 4 ◦C. The supernatant was further centrifuged at 14,000 g for 15 min at 4 ◦C. The crude mitochondrial pellet was separated and washed with buffer A and again centrifuged at 7000 g for 15 min at 4 ◦C. The final mitochondrial pellet was re-suspended in buffer B [10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4) and 0.44 M sucrose]. MAO-B activity was assayed by the method described by Gupta et al. [43] with slight modifications. The assay mixture contained 0.1 ml of 4 mM of benzylamine as the specific substrate for MAO-B and 2.75 ml of 0.1 M sodium phosphate buffer (pH 7.4). The reaction was initiated by the addition of mitochondrial fraction as source of MAO-B and the absorbance was recorded at a wavelength of 249.5 nm for 5 min against the blank. The activity of enzyme was expressed as nmol/min/mg protein. 2.4.3. Estimation of HXT, DA and its metabolites High performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) was used to analyze DA and its metabolites [dihydroxy-phenyl acetic acid (DOPAC) and homovanillic acid (HVA)] as well as HXT in the striatum as described by Church [44]. The striatum was rapidly isolated and homogenised in 100 μL ice-cold 0.2 N perchloric acid. After the homogenisation, it was centrifuged at 12,000g for 5 min at 4 ◦C. The supernatant was filtered using 0.25 µm nylon filter and the sample was injected into the injector valve of HPLC system consisting C18 reverse phase column (Waters symmetry C18 (5 µm) with length and diameter of 4.6 × 250 mm) and the analytes were detected using electrochemical detector. The mobile phase used in the experiment consisted of 2% (w/v) KHPO4, 2% (w/v) citric acid, 1.2% (v/v) methanol, 1 mM EDTA and sodium octyl sulphate (70 mg/ml) and pH was adjusted to 3.0. The DA and its metabolites were detected with the electrochemical conditions set at +0.800 V and sensitivity ranged from 5 to 50 nA. The data acquisition and processing was done using Empower software (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) and the results were expressed as ng/mg tissue. Ratio DOPAC + HVA/DA which represents dopamine turnover was also determined.
2. 2.4.4. Immunohistochemistry for tyrosine hydroxylase Immunostaining was performed using anti-Tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) antibody to evaluate the effect of HXT on MPTP-induced dopaminergic neuron loss. Animals were anaesthetised and perfused transcardially with phosphate buffer saline (PBS 0.1 M, pH 7.4) followed by 2% (w/v) paraformaldehyde in 0.1 M PBS (pH 7.4). The brains were removed and post-fixed in 4% (w/v) paraformaldehyde and embedded in paraffin wax. The sections (5 µm thickness) were cut and fixed on albumin coated slides. For immunohistochemical staining, the sections were deparaffinised, hydrated and treated with 1% (v/v) Triton X-100 in PBS for 30 min. Antigen retrieval was done by boiling the sections in sodium citrate buffer (pH 6.0) for 5–10 min. The non-specific antigens were blocked with 2% (w/v) BSA. After blocking, the sections were incubated overnight with anti-TH antibody (1:100) overnight at 4 ◦C in a humid chamber. Sections were then rinsed with ice cold TBS and incubated with horseradish peroxidase labelled secondary antibody (1:200) for 2 h at room temperature. The slides were then rinsed with PBS and colour was developed using 3,3- diaminobenzidinehydrogenperoxide (DAB-H2O2) solution and examined under microscope (Nikon Eclipse 80i, Japan). The TH-positive cells were analysed using ImageJ software (NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA). 2.5. Behaviour assessment 2.5.1. Catalepsy bar test Catalepsy bar test was used to measure muscular rigidity as described by Snuders et al. [45]. Animals were tested on a horizontal steel bar (15 cm long, diameter of 0.9 cm) maintained 5.5 cm above the ground. The test was done by holding the mouse by tail and placing the front paws on a steel bar and the hind legs on the plane surface. The descent latency was measured as time taken by the animals to correct the externally imposed position. A cut-off time was 180 s, i.e. the trial was terminated if the animal did not show any active paw movement. 2.5.2. Narrow beam walk test Motor coordination and balance was evaluated by the ability of mice to traverse a narrow beam (length= 1 m, descending width from 12 to 6 mm) rested on two poles at a height of 50 cm above the ground [46]. The mice were trained to traverse the beam and subsequently parameters such as time to traverse the beam and average velocity were recorded using ANY-maze™ video tracking software (Stoelting, Wood Dale, IL, USA). 2.5.3. Open field test Spontaneous locomotor activity of animals was assessed using the open-field test. An enclosed chamber (50 cm sides and height of 40 cm) was used for open field test [47]. Animals were placed in centre of the arena and observed for 3 min. Apparatus was cleaned with 95% (v/v) ethanol prior to use and cleaned again in between each test to remove odour cues. The data was recorded in terms of total distance travelled (m) and average velocity using ANY-maze™ video tracking software (Stoelting, Wood Dale, IL, USA). 2.6. Statistical analysis All values are expressed as mean ± standard error mean (SEM). The Data was analyzed using a one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Tukey’s multiple comparison test. Values with p < 0.05 were considered as statistically significant. 3. Results 3.1. In silico interactions of HXT with MAO 3.1.1. Molecular interactions In order to understand the molecular interactions of HXT with MAOA and MAO-B and its selective affinity towards MAO, molecular docking study followed by MMGBSA binding free energy calculation were performed. The docking score and binding free energies of all the ligands are given in Table 1 and the 3D docking pose in the active site of MAO-A and MAO-B together with 2D ligand interaction diagram of HXT, rasagiline, brofaromine and dopamine are given in Figs. 2 and 3. HXT had a docking score of − 6.89 kcal/mol (MAO-A) and − 7.932 kcal/mol (MAO-B) and ΔG binding of − 15.43 kcal/mol (MAOA) and − 30.83 kcal/mol (MAO-B) indicating selectivity in inhibiting MAO-B enzyme. The docking pose and 2D ligand interaction diagram (Fig. 3A) show that HXT tightly binds to MAO-B by forming π–π stacking with Tyr398, hydrogen bonding with Cys172 and strong hydrophobic interactions with amino acid residues in vicinity. The additional hydroxyl group at C3 side chain of HXT participated in hydrogen bonding with Ile198-Ile199. Ile199 is known as critical residue for MAO-B selectivity [48]. In case of MAO-A (Fig. 2A), HXT forms hydrogen bonding with Tyr444 and Asn181 (‒OH at C3 side chain) along with hydrophobic interactions with other amino acids residues. The hydroxyl groups in catechol moiety of HXT interacted weakly with Leu337 and Ile335 and this may be the reason for poorer binding with MAO-A and selectivity of HXT for MAO-B over MAO-A. Rasagiline is a highly selective irreversible inhibitor of MAO-B, currently used to treat PD [3]. Rasagiline has a docking score of − 5.452 kcal/mol for MAO-A and − 5.858 kcal/mol for MAO-B, while ΔG binding was − 22.03 kcal/mol for MAO-A and − 34.93 kcal/mol for MAO-B (Table 1). The 2D ligand interactions diagram showed that rasagiline binds into the substrate cavity of MAO-B lined by Ile199, Ile198, Phe168, Leu171, Cys172, Tyr326, Leu328, Phe343, Gln206, Tyr435, Gly434, Tyr188, Tyr398 and Tyr60 (Fig. 3B). Most of these residues in the substrate cavity are similar to those previously shown to be involved in binding of MAO inhibitors [49]. Similarly, HXT was found to interact with the same residues as that of rasagiline at the active site of MAO-B and thus indicating that these interactions are important for biological activity of MAO-B inhibitors. Brofaromine is a selective reversible inhibitor of MAO-A and used in the treatment of anxiety and depression [50]. Brofaromine showed the docking score of − 9.591 kcal/mol and − 8.825 kcal/mol for MAO-A and MAO-B, respectively (Table 1). Docking study showed that brofaromine has better binding affinity (ΔG = − 23.65 kcal/mol) to MAO-A than MAO-B (ΔG = − 19.19 kcal/mol). The mode of interaction between the brofaromine and the binding pocket of MAO-A was mainly hydrophobic with the interacting residues, namely Tyr69, Phe352, Met350, Ile207, Phe208, Val210, Leu97, Ala111, Ile325 and Cys323. Moreover, additional hydrogen bonding was found between the amine of brofaromine and Phe208 residue in the active site of MAO-A (Fig. 2C). In case of MAO-B, brofaromine forms hydrogen bonding with Tyr326 and hydrophobic interactions with Tyr60, Tyr435, Tyr398, Phe343, Phe168, Leu171, Cys172, Ile198, Ile199 and Ile316 (Fig. 3C). DA, substrate for MAO-B, had a docking score of − 7.289 kcal/mol (MAO-A) and 7.705 kcal/mol (MAO-B) and ΔG binding of − 16.24 kcal/ mol (MAO-A) and − 22.28 kcal/mol (MAO-B). In docking study of DAMAO-A, three hydrogen bonds were observed with Phe208, Thr336 and Gln215 (Fig. 2D). The stabilisation of DA in the active site of MAO-A was also rendered by hydrophobic interactions with other amino acid residues. In case of MAO-B, the catechol moiety of dopamine was involved in π–π stacking with Tyr398, hydrogen bonding with Cys172 and strong hydrophobic interactions with amino acid residues in vicinity (Fig. 3D). 3.1.2. Molecular dynamics simulation Molecular dynamics simulation studies were performed to examine the stability and dynamics of ligand-protein complex in a simulated physiological system. Fig. 4 depicts various MD trajectory data analysis for HXT. The RMSD plot (Fig. 4A) indicated an overall stable HXT-MAOB complex throughout the simulation period which was ascertained from RMSD values ranging from 1 to 3.5 Å for protein (MAO-B) and 0.3–1.2 Å for the ligand (HXT). It is observed that RMSD values for the protein increased during 0–20 ns timeframe which may be ascribed to equilibration process but after 20 ns the protein RMSD values were stabilised and indicated a stable protein structure. The flexibility of the protein structure was assessed during the entire simulation by calculating RMSF of individual amino acid residues in the protein (Fig. 4B). The entire protein system had an RMSF value between 0.5 and 2.5 Å except for the terminal amino acid residues that showed moderate movement throughout the 50 ns simulation. The interaction between ligand and individual amino acid residues inside the binding pocket of protein were quantified and represented in Fig. 4C. It can be seen from the plot that HXT (ligand) interacted with Ile198, Thr201, Gln206, Tyr398 and Tyr435 mainly through hydrogen bonding. Hydrophobic interactions with residues Tyr60, Leu171, Tyr326, Leu328, and Phe343 and water bridges with residues Ser59, Ile199, Ser200, Gln206 and Lys296 also played a supportive role in binding of the ligand to the active site of the protein. RMSF plot of ligand (Fig. 4D) suggested that HXT mostly stayed inside the binding pocket and remained bound to the active site amino acid residues. Fig. 4E depicts specific interactions between HXT and active site amino acid residues (Ile198 and Tyr326) of MAO-B. Finally, a timeline of protein ligand interactions in the form of hydrogen bonds, hydrophobic interaction, ionic interaction, and water bridges throughout the 50 ns simulation time was shown in Fig. 4F. The top panel indicates the total number of specific protein ligand contacts and the bottom panel indicates residue level interactions of the ligand. Overall, HXT interacted well with MAO-B binding pocket and a minimum of four contacts were present throughout the simulation period. Fig. 5 depicts the MD trajectory data analysis for ligand rasagiline. The RMSD plot (Fig. 5A) indicated that from 0 to 28 ns, the protein RMSD increased possibly due to equilibration as well as adaptation of ligand to the active site. However, after 30 ns the protein structure was stabilised as indicated by a stable value. The RMSD values varied from 1 to 4.2 Å for protein and 0.2–1.0 Å for the ligand. Additionally, the flexibility of the protein structure was evaluated during the entire simulation by calculating the RMSF of individual amino acid residues in the protein (Fig. 5B). The entire protein system had an RMSF value between 0.5 and 2.4 Å except for the terminal amino acid residues that showed moderate movement throughout the 50 ns simulation. The interaction between ligand and individual amino acid residues inside the binding pocket of protein were quantified and represented in Fig. 5C. It can be seen from the plot that rasagiline interacted with Ile171 and Gln206 mainly through hydrogen bonding, with Cys172, Tyr188, Phe343, Tyr398 and Tyr435 by hydrophobic interactions and with Ile198, Gln206 and Tyr326 via water bridges. RMSF plot of ligand (Fig. 5D) which suggested that rasagiline was located in the binding pocket and bound to the active site amino acid residues. Fig. 5E depicts specific interactions between rasagiline and active site amino acid residues of MAO-B. Finally, a timeline of protein ligand interactions in the form of hydrogen bonds, hydrophobic interaction, ionic interaction, and water bridges throughout the 50 ns simulation time are shown in Fig. 5F. The top panel indicates the total number of specific protein ligand contacts and the bottom panel indicates residue level interactions of the ligand. Overall, the rasagiline interacted well with MAO-B binding pocket and a minimum of two contacts were present throughout the simulation period. Fig. 6 depicts all the data of MD trajectory for DA. The RMSD plot (Fig. 6A) showed RMSD values ranging from 1 to 4.3 Å for protein and 0.2–0.4 Å for the ligand. The protein structure was stabilised after 28 ns as observed in the case of rasagiline-MAO-B docked complex (Fig. 5A). In addition, the flexibility of the protein structure during the entire simulation was evaluated by calculating the RMSF of individual amino acid residues in the protein (Fig. 6B). The entire protein system had an RMSF value between 0.5 and 1.8 Å except for the terminal amino acid residues which showed moderate movement throughout the 50 ns simulation. The binding interactions between ligand and individual amino acid residues inside the binding pocket of protein were computed and represented in Fig. 6C. It was observed that DA interacted with Thr201, Gln206, Tyr326 and Tyr435 mainly through hydrogen bonding. Hydrophobic interactions with residues Tyr60, Leu171, Leu328, Phe343 and Tyr398 and water bridges with residues Ile198, and Ile199 also played a supportive role in binding the ligand to the active site of the protein. RMSF plot of ligand suggested that DA stayed inside the binding pocket and remained bound to the active site amino acid residues (Fig. 6D). Fig. 6E depicts specific interactions between DA and active site amino acid residues of MAO-B. Finally, a timeline of protein ligand interactions in the form of hydrogen bonds, hydrophobic interaction, ionic interaction, and water bridges are shown in Fig. 6F throughout the 50 ns simulation time. The top panel indicates the total number of specific protein ligand contacts and the bottom panel indicates residue level interactions of the ligand. Overall, DA interacted well with MAO-B binding pocket and a minimum of four contacts were present throughout the simulation period. 3.2. ADME properties of HXT The drug-like properties of the compounds were analysed based on the “Lipinski rule of five” and the results (ADME test) are summarised in Table 2. According to Lipinski’s rule, it is expected that a drug-like molecule should not have more than one of the violations given as follows: molecular weight more than 500; more than five hydrogen bond donors; LogP more than 5 and more than ten hydrogen bond acceptors [33]. The result of this study showed that the HXT demonstrated the properties required of a drug based on Lipinski’s rule. Moreover, HXT gave a Blood Brain Barrier (BBB) permeability score of 0.066, which suggests that HXT can easily cross the BBB (Fig. 7). 3.3. Inhibition of platelet MAO-B by HXT MAO-B activity was measured in terms of formation of 4-hydroxyquinoline with compounds in a broad range of concentration. A plot of the fluorescence intensity of 4-hydroxyquinoline revealed a linear correlation, y = 6.6562x + 6.2351 with a correlation coefficient of 0.997 (Fig. 8A). MAO-B inhibition was determined based on the rate of kynuramine oxidation for HXT. HXT was found to inhibit MAO-B activity with an IC50 value of 7.78 μM (Fig. 8B), whereas, rasagiline used as reference compound inhibited MAO-B with an IC50 value of 4.82 nM (Fig. 8C). 3.4. Protective effects of HXT on MPTP induced PD model 3.4.1. HXT levels in brain The ability of HXT to cross the BBB was assessed by estimation of HXT in brain by using HPLC. The mice were orally treated with 50 mg/ kg HXT for 7 days prior and post-MPTP treatment. After seven days, mice were sacrificed and striatal region was analyzed. The concentration of HXT in pre-HXT + MPTP group was 8.93 ± 2.03 ng/mg tissue, while in post-HXT MPTP group, the concentration was 35.39 ± 9.90 ng/mg tissue. In HXT alone group, the concentration of HXT was 7.36 ± 1.17 ng/mg tissue (Table 3). 3.4.2. Effect of HXT on MAO-B activity MAO-B activity was assayed in the striatum of animals from each group. MAO-B activity was significantly increased in MPTP treated animals by approximately 65% as compared to control animals. However, the animals that received HXT pre-and post-MPTP treatment showed a significant decrease in MAO-B activity. Furthermore, HXT alone also decreased MAO-B activity by 72% (Table 3). 3.4.3. Effect of HXT on catecholamines levels The effect of HXT on DA, DOPAC and HVA levels was evaluated at the end of treatment and presented in Table 3. MPTP treatment significantly reduced DA, DOPAC and HVA by 63%, 48% and 34%, respectively. HXT increased DA levels in both pre-and post-HXT treated groups, while DOPAC and HVA levels were significantly reduced. DA turnover i.e amount of DA converted to DOPAC and HVA was significantly increased in MPTP group, whereas pre-and post-treatment of HXT reduced DA conversion to DOPAC and HVA. 
3.4.4. Effect of HXT on nigrostriatal DArgic neurons The extent of nigrostriatal DArgic neuronal loss was assessed by tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) immunostaining and the results are presented in Fig. 9. In MPTP mice, a considerable loss of TH-Immunopositive cell bodies were found in the substantia nigra (SN) and fibres in the striatum as compared to control (Fig. 9A). Moreover, HXT treatment effectively reduced MPTP-induced loss of DA neurons in the SN and their nerve terminals in the striatum. The quantitative analysis showed that preHXT and post-HXT treatment increased the number of THImmunopositive neurons in SN by 1.6-fold and 1.5-fold, respectively, as compared to MPTP (Fig. 9B). The density of TH-Immunopositive fibres in striatum were also increased in pre-HXT treatment (2.5-fold), while no change was observed in post-HXT treated group (Fig. 9C). 3.5. Effect of HXT on motor behaviour Catalepsy bar test: In MPTP animals, muscular rigidity was significantly increased as compared to the control group. However, pre- and post-HXT treatment significantly reduced the muscular rigidity by 28% and 78%, respectively (Fig. 10). Narrow beam walk test: Muscle coordination and hind limb impairment was evaluated using narrow beam walk test. Representative heat maps for the animals in various groups are shown in Fig. 11A. The time taken to traverse the beam by the MPTP treated animals showed significant increase as compared to control. Pre and post-HXT treatment significantly reduced the time taken to traverse the beam as compared to animals from MPTP treated group (Fig. 11B). Moreover, average speed was increased after pre and post-HXT treatment as compared to MPTP group. MPTP group showed significant reduction in average speed as compared to control mice suggesting motor impairments which were reversed on HXT administration (Fig. 11C). Open field test: Open field test was used to measure locomotor activity in terms of total distance travelled and average velocity. MPTP treated animals showed significant reduction in total distance travelled as compared to controls which was also evident from the track plots (Fig. 12A and B). Moreover, average velocity was also reduced in MPTP treated animals (Fig. 12C), while no significant change was observed in pre-and post-HXT treated animals. 4. Discussion Current treatment for PD involves MAO-B specific inhibitors in combination with levodopa [51]. A few compounds are commercially available as specific MAO-B inhibitors that have “Cheese effect” [52]. Herein, we report a naturally occurring phytochemical, HXT as a potential molecule in the treatment of PD because of its selective MAO-B inhibitory ability. The inhibitory potential of HXT was studied using in silico molecular docking approach. The results from molecular docking revealed that HXT binds to both MAO-A and MAO-B. However, the docking score as well as the binding free energy value supports that HXT has a higher selectivity towards MAO-B as compared to MAO-A as indicated by its almost two-fold higher free energy of binding for complexation with MAO-A than MAO-B. HXT forms most stable complex with MAO-B through occupation of active site of enzyme by forming hydrogen bonds with Ile198-Ile199 residues. Ile199 is considered as an important residue for MAO-B selectivity and it has been reported that blocking of this residue leads to inhibition in the enzyme activity [48,49]. This suggests that the mode of binding and inhibition of MAO-B by HXT is similar to that of known molecules. Using molecular docking as well as in vitro and in vivo approaches, it has been shown that flavonoids, xanthones, tannins, proanthocyanidins, iridoid glycosides, curcumin, alkaloids, cannabinoids all exert inhibitory effect on MAO-B activity [53]. In addition, the results from MD simulation have shown good stability and less conformational change in HXT-MAO-B binding complex during the 50 ns trajectory. Pharmacokinetics of HXT was studied using in silico ADME screening as many potential therapeutic molecules in the past have failed at preclinical and clinical stages because of unsatisfactory pharmacokinetics [54]. ADME screening of HXT showed satisfactory pharmacokinetics based on Lipinski’s “Rule-of-Five” which gives an indication of good bioavailability of HXT by oral route. Aleman-Jim ´ ´enez et al. [55] have also shown that bioavailability of HXT is dependent on food matrix as the extra virgin olive was identified as the best matrix over fortified refined olive, flax, and grapeseed oils. Visioli et al. [56] found a good correlation between HXT levels after ingestion of HXT containing olive oil. Tuck et al. [57] estimated 99% absorption of the total intake in olive oil and 75% in aqueous solution. Furthermore, almost all HXT was shown to be present in plasma and urine as glucuronide conjugates. These findings suggest adequate bioavailability and metabolism of HXT. In vitro effects of HXT on MAO-B activity from human platelets were also examined. Platelets have been extensively used as a peripheral marker of biochemical processes in the nervous system [58]. Human platelets primarily have MAO-B with almost no MAO-A activity [39]. The amino acid sequence of MAO-B from brain and platelets is identical along with similar pharmacological and biochemical characteristics [59]. Therefore, platelet MAO has been used as an alternative model to target MAO-B in neurological and psychiatric disorders [60]. Furthermore, MAO-B activity has been reported to be increased in platelets of PD patients [61]. Evidence suggests that brain MAO-B inhibition parallels platelet MAO inhibition [59]. We observed that HXT inhibited MAO-B activity in concentration dependent manner with an IC50 value of 7.78 μM. Similarly, by molecular docking studies as well as by in vitro and in vivo studies various natural compounds such as flavonoids, xanthones, polyphenols have also been shown to be selective MAO-B inhibitors [53]. In addition, rasagiline inhibited MAO-B activity with an IC50 of 4.82 nM, which is similar to a previously reported values [62]. A recent study carried out by Perez-Barron et al. [26] also showed inhibitory potential of HXT on MAO-B activity and neuroprotective effects following MPP+ induced damage. The development of HXT as a therapeutic molecule for PD would depend on its ability to cross BBB. This was examined by quantitative index and in silico prediction. HXT was orally administered pre- and post-MPTP treatment to C57BL/6 mice. After administration, the concentration of HXT in striatum was measured. HXT was found to be higher in post-HXT + MPTP animals than pre-HXT + MPTP and HXT treated animals. The detection of HXT in the striatal region of brain in all three groups confirmed its permeability across BBB. In silico analysis for BBB prediction using AlzPlatform database suggested permeability of HXT across BBB. Our results are further supported by the findings that [ 14C] HXT accumulated in brain suggesting its ability to cross BBB [63]. The lower levels of HXT in animals pre-treated with HXT might be due to elimination of HXT as levels were estimated after seven days of the last dose of HXT. It has been reported that HXT is metabolised in the body and excreted in the urine [64] and hence is safer. Furthermore, a recent study has shown the accumulation of HXT and HXT-sulphate in the brain [65]. The authors reported that native HXT form was more effective than HXT-sulphate conjugate in reducing oxidative stress in human neuroblastoma cell lines (SH-SY5Y) and in DArgic neuronal cells. Moreover, Valenzuela et al. [66] reported that HXT modulates the antioxidant response, mainly by regulating the activity and expression of transcription factor Nrf2. In addition, HXT can also regulate the activity and expression of transcription factor NF-kB and thus exert its anti-inflammatory action [67]. Valenzuela et al. [68] also reported that HXT can preserve brain functions and prevent neurodegenerative conditions by maintaining levels of polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) in the brain, especially n-3 PUFA. Therefore, HXT may have beneficial effects in PD via its anti-oxidant and anti-inflammatory action besides MAO-B inhibition. In in-vivo study, MAO-B activity was increased in the brain of MPTP induced PD model, which is in accordance with the increased MAO-B activity reported in the brain of PD patients [61,69]. However, MPTP treated animals that received pre-and post-HXT treatment, the activity of MAO-B was inhibited. Animals that received HXT alone also showed reduced MAO-B activity as compared to control. These findings further confirm the in silico and in vitro findings for MAO-B inhibition by HXT. Furthermore, the data from the present study showed the ability of HXT in reversing MPTP-induced DA depletion. HXT also reduced DOPAC and HVA levels following both pre-and post-HXT treatment to MPTP exposed animals. This reduction can be ascribed to the inhibitory effect of HXT on MAO-B activity. In addition, DA turnover i.e metabolism of DA to DOPAC and HVA was reduced following HXT treatment thereby maintaining DA levels in brain. Our results are in accordance with the previous report that HXT maintains the striatal DA levels in MPP+ model of PD [26]. Furthermore, the immunohistochemical results showed that HXT treatment restored MPTP-induced loss of DA neurons in the SN and striatum. Therefore, it is appears that HXT may protect striatal DA at relatively constant levels without affecting rate of DA renewal by protecting TH positive neurons. Acute MPTP administration to mice induced significant motor deficits, which are in line with previous studies showing motor impairments after acute MPTP intoxication [70,71]. Pre-and post-treatment with HXT attenuated motor impairments as assessed by catalepsy bar test, narrow beam walk and open field test. Catalepsy is a state of behavioural immobility which is characterised by the rigidity of muscles and the individuals fail to maintain the posture for a long time. Catalepsy has high clinical relevance as a similar behavioural abnormality is observed in PD and schizophrenia patients [72]. In the present study, significant increase in descent latency was observed in MPTP treated mice that was improved on HXT supplementation. Further, motor deficits following MPTP administration were also analysed by narrow beam walk test. Narrow beam walk test assesses hind limb impairments and muscle coordination in terms of time taken to traverse the beam and average speed. MPTP exposed mice took significantly more time to cross the beam than the controls. However, HXT supplementation decreased the time taken by the animals to cross the beam and concomitantly increased the average velocity. The restoration in DA levels by HXT in the striatum appears to prevent motor impairments induced by acute MPTP intoxication. Recently, Siracusa et al. [24] reported that HXT attenuated motor impairments induced by the rotenone administration. HXT has also been shown to reverse the spatio-cognitive deficits in mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease [73]. Moreover, maternal HXT supplementation improved prenatal stress-induced cognitive impairments and improved neurogenesis [74]. In conclusion, the present study demonstrates potential of HXT as an anti-parkinsonian molecule that enhances DA levels in brain through inhibition of MAO-B activity. Moreover, HXT also alleviated motor impairments in MPTP intoxicated mice. In addition, neuroprotective properties of HXT may also be ascribed to its anti-oxidant and anti-inflammatory properties. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study suggesting HXT as inhibitor of MAO-B using in silico as well as using animal model of PD. The findings from the study are of immense importance in developing HXT as a promising drug candidate in treating PD and other conditions wherein MAO-B could be a potential target.
